 Parental mediation literature is mostly situated in the contexts of television, Internet use, video games, and mobile devices, while there is less understanding of how parents mediate their children's engagement with educational-focused media. We examine parental involvement in young children's use of a creation-oriented educational media, i.e., coding kits, from a mediation perspective through an interview study. We frame parents’ mediation practices along three dimensions: (1) creative mediation, where parents mediate to support children's creating and learning with media; (2) preparative mediation, where parents explore and prepare media for children's engagement; and (3) administrative mediation, where parents administer and regulate their children's media use. Compared to the restrictive, active, and co-using mediation theory, our proposed framework highlights various supportive practices parents take to help their children learn and create with media. We further connect our findings to Joint Media Engagement and reflect on implications for parent involvement in children's creation-oriented media design.
 ACM Reference Format: Junnan Yu, Andrea DeVore, and Ricarose Roque. 2021. Parental Mediation for Young Children's Use of Educational Media: A Case Study with Computational Toys and Kits. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '21), May 8–13, 2021, Yokohama, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA 12 Pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445427
As our world has become highly digitalized, young people nowadays consume a significant amount of media like mobile devices and the Internet . In the remainder of this paper, we frequently use the terms parental involvement and parental mediation. The difference is that we see parental involvement as a neutral phrase for for parents’ engagement in all phases of children's interaction with media, while parental mediation highlights the power parents have over their children. 
Three examples of coding kits.
As the landscape of media has expanded rapidly from television to the Internet, video games, social media, and mobile apps in the past decades, new parental mediation practices beyond the restrictive, active, and co-using strategies are emerging, such as investigating game content and monitoring children's online messages (e.g., ). How parents mediate children's learning with creation-oriented educational media, which support children to learn by creating and building, needs more exploration and understanding. Ignoring these mediation practices may lead to missed design opportunities that can facilitate productive learning outcomes for children and foster meaningful parent-child joint learning experiences.
In this work, we examine parental mediation practices in the context of young children's use of computational toys and kits (shortened as ”coding kits”). Coding kits are apps, toys, and kits designed to support children's learning of computational thinking and computer programming skills. Coding kits take different forms, including physical kits (i.e., kits whose components are tangible), virtual kits (i.e., computer-based applications), and hybrid kits (i.e., kits that include both tangible and virtual parts) ; and (4) coding and computational thinking skills (e.g., decomposition and modeling) can be difficult for young children to learn by themselves and will require certain mediation from adults.
We performed semi-structured interviews with eighteen parents who obtained coding kits for their young children at home. We report findings of parental mediation patterns during their children's use of coding kits in this paper. This work is specifically motivated from both literature on parental mediation theory and our work on understanding how parents are involved in young children's interaction with coding kits, i.e., we did not find appropriate parent-involvement frameworks within CSCW and HCI for the data analysis. Therefore, we decided to develop this theory-oriented paper and expand the widely-adopted parental mediation theory. Our guiding research question is: how do parents mediate young children's interaction with creation-oriented educational media? Based on the findings, we frame parental mediation practices along three dimensions: (1) creative mediation, where parents mediate to support children's creating and learning during media use; (2) preparative mediation, where parents explore and prepare media for children's engagement; and (3) administrative mediation, where parents administer and regulate their children's media use. Compared to the restrictive, active, and co-using mediation framework, our proposed framework highlights the various supportive practices parents take to help their children learn and create with media. We also call for the need to expand the meaning of Joint Media Engagement  to include various parental involvement, such as preparing media, setting rules, and monitoring children's media engagement, not just co-using experiences. Importantly, we are not aiming to replace the restrictive, active, and co-using mediation framework, but to complement the framework and enrich the spirit of this framework into a new context—continuing to further our understanding of the ways parents mediate children's media use. Overall, this work provides insights into how parents mediate their children's use of creation-oriented coding kits and expands the parental mediation framework in children's engagement with educational media.
This paper aims to expand the understanding of parental mediation in the context of children's educational media usage. We examine how parents support and mediate their young children's use of coding kits at home. Therefore, we focus on literature about parental mediation theory and parents’ mediation in children's use of educational media.
Parental mediation usually refers to the strategies that parents take during their children's media usage to minimize the risks and maximize the benefits of media influence on the kids , rather than simply co-watching a screen.
Even though expanded, some researchers have highlighted the inadequacy of the Restrictive, Active, and Co-using/playing framework (shortened as RAC framework for convenience) in accommodating the fast-changing, more interactive, and highly networked and socialized media landscape today .
Some researchers have proposed new frameworks for parental mediation. Livingstone and Helsper  so that future technology design can better help parents increase benefits and decrease risks for their children. With that, this paper aims to expand the parental mediation frameworks in the context of a creation-oriented educational media.
Most research regarding parental mediation of children's media usage is situated in the contexts of television (e.g.,  developed a mobile-phone-based literacy learning system named Allo Aphabet for children from families with limited resources. Their user study showed family members played different supporting roles at different times: parents sometimes structured the contexts for children's learning, while taking control of the mobile phone in other cases. Parents would also provide technical support (e.g., connecting the phone to a lesson) and encouragement to motivate their children to keep learning. In sum, parent role is no doubt an important lens to examine parental involvement and inspire the design of more productive learning experiences for children. Studying parental mediation patterns, however, will complement the parent-role picture with parents’ more administrative roles as well as their frustrations and challenges during children's learning with media. In this work, we examine parent involvement in young children's use of coding kits from a mediation perspective. The findings expand the understanding of parental mediation in the context of young children's use of educational media.
This work is part of a study that explores how parents perceive and support their young children's use of coding kits , respectively. We interviewed eighteen participants who had at least one child between 3-9 years old and the child has experience with coding kits at home, who are referred to as P1-P18 for the anonymous purpose in the following sections. The participants were recruited through social media, community-based organizations that are in partnership with our research group, and snowball sampling (i.e., asking participants to recommend new participants). Each participant filled out a 5-to-10-minute online survey that asked their and their children's demographic information, the coding kits they had, and the consent for participation in this study. Then we performed a phone or online semi-structured interview with them, which was audio-recorded and took around 45 minutes. The interview questions were centered around parents’ perspectives and experiences regarding their young children's use of coding kits (e.g., describing your children's most recent play with coding kits, how you were involved in the play). We provided a $20 Amazon gift card for each participant to compensate them for their time.
Participants aged between 29 – 56 years old (mean = 39.10), including 13 females and 5 males. Of the participants, 14 identified as White, 3 Asian, and one did not disclose race. Sixteen participants were from the United States across 6 states, two were from the United Kingdom, and none of them were from the same family. Among the 18 participants, 16 had a bachelor's degree or above, one attended some college and one was a high school graduate. A total of 31 children were reported between 3-9 years old from these participants with an average age of 6.02, including 18 girls and 13 boys. Three participants had one child when the interview happened and the remaining 15 reported two or more children.
More than 20 different coding kits were reported by the participants, including physical kits (e.g., Code-a-pillar ). Eleven participants reported two or more kits for their children and the remaining 7 had one kit.
The interview data provided a rich account of parental involvement in children's engagement with coding kits: the first two authors identified a total of 428 pieces of segments (24,907 words) that reflected parental mediation from the interview transcripts. Following the tradition of thematic analysis ). Coding disagreements were addressed through discussions between the two coders. Importantly, we did not follow the RAC framework for analysis because this framework did not cover all the parents’ mediation practices or represent well parents’ intentions for mediation during their children's use of coding kits. For example, ”active mediation” refers to the conversations between parents and children but does not provide insights into what the conversations are about and why parents/children would initiate these conversations. Therefore, we developed a codebook to more precisely capture parents’ behaviors and intentions during their children's creating and learning with coding kits. In the discussion, we further reflect on how these themes connect to parent-role literature, the RAC framework and Joint Media Engagement, as well as design implications for creation-oriented media.
First, we focus on parental mediation practices with educational media based on parent involvement in children's use of coding kits in this paper. However, coding kits are only a small portion of the landscape of educational media. We might miss some parental mediation patterns with other media. Second, we focus on young children (ages 3-9 years old) and parents may mediate their older children's media usage differently. Third, our participants are relatively well-educated and predominantly white, our findings may not apply to other parent groups. This can be attributed to the non-diversity coding market itself because most coding kits are generally expensive and many parents may not be aware of the existence of coding kits . To mitigate the negative impact of participants on this study, we compare our findings to parental mediation practices in families from non-dominant groups with other media reported in literature to highlight the similarities and differences in Discussion section, such that other researchers can better decide if our proposed framework works for their research contexts. Fourth, the method we chose for this study, i.e., remote interviews, might also limit the richness of information parents shared with us.
In this section, we present details about how the parental mediation patterns listed in Table 1 are enacted from parents’ descriptions, as well as the relationship between parental mediation patterns and the types of coding kits.
We frame parents’ support for children's creating and learning during media usage as ”creative mediation.” As aforementioned, coding kits are creation-oriented educational media, with which children can create projects (e.g., animations and stories) or solve predefined challenges through computer programming. Parents want their children to benefit from playing with coding kits, e.g., getting a basic understanding of computer programming and becoming less intimidated by technologies . Therefore, they are frequently involved in supporting their children to create and learn with the kits. We identified six creative mediation patterns, including collaborating, providing encouragement, providing scaffold, respecting independence, solving problems, and teaching.
In the pattern collaborating, parents act as a co-player and collaborator for their children's creating with media. However, parents may take different approaches when co-using the media with children. Specifically, parents sometimes would take an equal participation role, such as coming up with project ideas together, taking turns with the kits, and competing against each other. For example, P2 shared that ”we are both doing things  up in the driver seat and doing everything” (P3).
In the pattern providing encouragement, parents are audiences and provide encouragement for children's creating with media. In many cases, children would grab their parents, show off their projects, and even teach their parents how to build the projects. P15 shared that when her children set up an obstacle course for the kit Sphero, they would come to her and say like ”look at what I did, I made this cool obstacle course, come watch me navigate through it.” In response, parents would be children's project audiences and praise their creativity, such as commenting ”that's really cool” (P8) and ”I'm really proud of it ” (P6).
In the pattern providing scaffold, parents direct children's engagement with media into meaningful interactions. Parents would often propose play ideas for their children to try with coding kits because they wanted their children to ”understand programming” (P9) and ”think deeper” (P2). Specifically, some parents tried to elicit play ideas for their children by asking questions like ”where do you want it  will give him tips.” Particularly, parents would try to avoid directly giving answers but let the children try themselves so that they ”can kind of figure it out on their own” (P13).
In the pattern respecting independence, parents respect their children's play ideas and independent media usage. Parents consistently reported that they wanted their children to lead the play with coding kits so that children could learn more from the kits. As P1 stated, ”the more I do, the less she  on them because we want them to enjoy it for themselves.”
In the pattern solving problems, parents help solve problems children encounter during media usage. First, parents helped their children achieve certain effects and debug with coding. When creating with ScratchJr, P5 shared that her 6-year-old son would ask questions like ”how do I make this happen?” Then she would sit down with the kid and help implement the desired effects. Similarly, P10 needed to step in when his 7-year-old daughter ”is trying to figure out what the relationship for a trigger to do a sequence of steps, or if she is having trouble figuring out parameters.” Second, parents provided emotional support for children, such as redirecting frustrations that arose during coding and ”get and help figure out the problem” (P10). Third, parents needed to provide technical support for their children's interaction with coding kits, such as changing batteries (P4, P14) and connecting Bluetooth (P10). Fourth, parents who had several children would need reconcile the conflicts between siblings sometimes because the children might fight for the control of coding kits or ”the younger one becomes marginalized” (P1). As such, parents would ”come around to intervene” (P8) and help the siblings work together (e.g., P1, P5).
In the pattern teaching, parents demonstrate and teach their children how to use media. Teaching is a common pattern when a family just got a coding kit: parents would usually teach their children how to use the kit and what could be done with the kit. As P14 shared, ”he .” When it came to coding, some parents would be highly hands-on and explain the meaning of coding commands and syntaxes to their children. P16 recalled that ”I have to be there to explain the syntax properly” when her 9-year-old daughter was first introduced to Scratch.
In addition to the support that parents gave during their children's media usage, they would explore and prepare media for children to engage in. We frame such mediation practices as ”preparative mediation” and summarize two sub-patterns, including exploring media and setting up media.
In the pattern exploring media, parents learn to use the media or investigate new media that can benefit their children educationally. Coding kits could be difficult for children to play with and children sometimes would not use the kits ”for the intended purpose” (P14). Some parents, therefore, would learn to use a coding kit before introducing it to their children. For example, P18 mentioned that he ”usually tried to go through a tutorial first” and P9 ”looked at some YouTube videos or Google and saw what some other people did ”), if children would be interested (e.g., P1, P11), and if the media was ”age-appropriate” (P7) and reasonably priced (e.g., P1, P4).
In the pattern setting up media, parents provide and set up media for their children to engage with. A frequent role that parents mentioned is to help set up coding kits for their children. With virtual and hybrid coding kits, parents would usually help open the devices and applications. For example, P7 mentioned that she and her husband ”downloaded the app” and ”put all the batteries in” for their kids; P5 would help ”turn the computer on and open up his  off” and ”clean up the pieces and tiles” (P6) after children play with the kits.
We frame parents’ administration and regulation of their children's media usage as ”administrative mediation” and identified three sub-patterns, including controlling access, framing values, and monitoring.
In the pattern controlling access, parents control children's media access. Parents took different attitudes and practices when regulating their children's use of coding kits. First, some parents did not set any limitations on their interaction with the kits because of the kits’ educational purposes. P15 shared, ”we think it  are programming or doing CODE.ORG, we let them do a little bit more than if they are playing a game.”
In the pattern framing values, parents set values for their children's interaction with media. First, parents with more than one child required the siblings to work collaboratively with coding kits and not ”fight against each other” (P1). Second, some parents mentioned that they asked their children to be gentle with coding kits and not break them (e.g., P2, P4) because ”it  is expensive” (P8). Third, given that some kits were played online, such as Scratch and LightBot, some parents would specifically tell their children not to browse other websites or interact with people online because they were concerned about their children's online safety or exposure to inappropriate content (e.g., P5, P7, P13).
In the pattern monitoring, parents monitor what media and where children are using. Parents consistently mentioned their monitoring of children's engagement with coding kits. For example, P3 mentioned that she ”would be around” when her daughter played with coding kits; P5 would ”keep the door  are working on” (P10).
We further examined how these identified mediation patterns distribute across physical, virtual, and hybrid kits by counting the pattern frequency for each participant based on the types of kits they owned. For each kit type, i.e., physical, virtual, and hybrid kits, we identified all the 11 mediation patterns parents performed. The difference is that with certain types of coding kits, parents tended to mediate more, or less, in certain ways. These similarities and differences include: (1) parents were similarly involved in 7 mediation patterns for physical, virtual, and hybrid kits, including collaborating, providing encouragement, respecting independence, exploring media, setting up media, framing values, and monitoring; (2) parents seldom reported controlling their children's access to physical kits because “it  is really just about learning” (P15), whereas with virtual and hybrid kits that include a screen, parents exercised more access control for the devices and would often set time limits, e.g., “you have 30 minutes to do with OSMO” (P13); (3) parents practiced more scaffolding, problem-solving, and teaching for their children with physical and hybrid kits than virtual kits. This difference can be attributed to the design features of physical, virtual, and hybrid kits, i.e., physical and hybrid kits usually include a physical robot that moves around and can be easily noticed by parents, while virtual kits are mostly designed for individual coding where children sit in front of a screen and seldom interact with the environment. Therefore, the physicality of physical and hybrid kits can effortlessly attract parents’ attention and invite their interactions like suggesting play ideas, helping debug a code, and teaching new skills for their children.
In this section, we first present a synthesis of the findings and how they relate to parent-role literature, then connect the findings to parental mediation practices reported in literature about families from non-dominant groups, followed by a reflection on how our proposed framework overlaps and extends the RAC framework. Even though JME is not the focus of the current paper, some our findings align with JME. Therefore, we also include a discussion about the implications of this work for JME. Finally, we present some implications for designing creation-oriented educational media.
Our findings provide insights into parents’ mediation practices in young children's engagement with a creation-oriented educational media, i.e., coding kits. We frame these practices into three categories: creative, preparative, and administrative mediation. Under creative mediation, parents take different approaches to support their children's creating with the kits, which briefly includes teaching children how to use a kit, creating projects together with children, scaffolding children's interaction with the kits into meaningful directions, respecting children's project ideas and independent play, acting as audiences and providing encouragement for children's projects, as well as helping children navigate through technical and emotional difficulties. Under preparative mediation, parents explore and prepare media for children to engage in, such as learning to use a kit so that they can teach their children, setting up a kit, and providing new educational media. With administrative mediation, parents administer and regulate their children's use of coding kits, such as controlling children's access to the kits, setting play rules, and monitoring children's interactions with the kits. Note that parents’ mediation practices with coding kits are fluid and dynamic across the creative, preparative, and administrative mediation patterns, which resonates with parents’ mediation practices in children's consumption of other media like video games . For example, parents may help take out a coding kit and set up the kit for their children (preparative mediation), then stay in the same room and keep an eye on children's play (administrative mediation), and are occasionally asked by their children to help debug a code (creative mediation).
Even though we summarize a variety of parental mediation patterns in children's use of coding kits, parents mainly take on supportive practices (i.e., creative and preparative mediation), which can be attributed to the educational nature of coding kits and that parents want their children to benefit from playing with coding kits ), such as being around to provide help when needed, simply wanting to know what the child is working on, or prompting siblings to take turns.
Previous literature has examined different parent roles in children's engagement with technology. Barron and colleagues . Together with the parent-role literature, our findings add empirical evidence that parents are important in supporting children's learning with media. Future design of educational media should consider resources and space that better support parents in supporting their children's learning.
The major limitation of this study is a lack of diversity in our participants, who are mostly affluent and White. Can our findings be applied to people of other demographics, especially those with less privilege? In this section, we compare our findings to the parental mediation practices reported in literature about families from non-dominant groups, who have been disconnected from opportunity by reasons of race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. Note that these studies are not specifically about mediation but we can still see how parents are involved from their findings.
Many of our identified parental mediation practices with young children's use of coding kits can be found in the practices that parents from non-dominant groups perform to mediate their children's engagement with other types of media. Specifically, collaborating is a common practice between parents and children across different media, e.g., reading and listening to E-book apps together ). These similarities between our findings and mediation practices of parents from non-dominant groups for other types of media indicate our proposed framework can be applied to families of other demographic backgrounds and media types.
However, we also notice one difference – some studies with families from non-dominant groups highlight parents as a learner and children as a teacher during joint media engagement, e.g., children teach parents how to search online information and browse webpages, which were mainly identified in immigrant families where parents have less fluency of technology and English than their children ), which can be attributed to the differences in media types and participants’ expertise of technologies and languages in those studies. In sum, our proposed framework can be applied to examine parental mediation of children's engagement with various media but should be used with caution, namely to be adjusted or extended as necessary.
As aforementioned, the RAC framework was originated from parental mediation practices during children's television watching and largely enriched in children's use of consumption-oriented media like video games and the Internet. With the creation-oriented educational media coding kits, the RAC framework does not well capture parents’ efforts in preparing the media and helping their children to learn from the kits. Therefore, we develop the creative, preparative, and administrative mediation framework to highlight the supportive roles parents play to facilitate their children's learning and creating with the kits. However, some of our identified mediation patterns also fit into the RAC framework.
Table 2 shows how the 11 parental mediation patterns in our proposed framework connect to the RAC framework. Two meditation patterns completely align with the RAC framework, namely ”collaborating” and ”providing scaffold.” The remaining patterns either have some overlap with the RAC framework or are completely beyond the scope of the framework. For example, with the pattern ”solving problems,” parents may help calm the kids down and redirect their frustrations through conversations (active mediation), and sometimes sit down with the kids until a problem is solved (co-using), as well as provide technical support like connecting Bluetooth for the kids (a none-RAC pattern). Parents’ practices under ”preparative mediation,” like learning to use media and setting up media for their kids, are not captured by the RAC framework. However, we are not aiming to replace the RAC framework but to enrich the spirit of this framework into a new context—continuing to further our understanding of the ways parents mediate children's media use. Our proposed framework is specifically situated in children's use of a creation-oriented educational media and we hope it will help designers to better consider different parental involvement in children's learning and creating with educational media. 
Three examples of coding kits.
Given the increasing interest in Joint Media Engagement (JME) within HCI recently, we further reflect on the relationship between JME, parental mediation theory, and our proposed framework. The existing HCI literature mostly explores new scenarios and forms of JME (e.g., . Even though Takeuchi and Stevens mentioned parental mediation practices like setting rules (P.12), they did not specifically state how to position these mediation practices within JME or vice versa. Accordingly, JME is part of the RAC mediation framework and includes both ”active mediation” and ”co-viewing/using,” as illustrated in Figure 2(a).
Following Figure 2(a), most parent mediation patterns under our proposed ”creative mediation” are JME practices, e.g., ”collaborating,” ”providing encouragement,” and ”providing scaffold.” Therefore, our work adds an empirical case of education-centered media engagement between parent and child to JME. Through our study, we see the major limitation of JME is that it specifically focuses on shared media experiences between people while not giving enough attention to behind-the-scenes work like exploring and preparing media and monitoring media use. As such, we need to draw additional frameworks to examine the less invisible involvement. Therefore, we see the need to expand the meaning of JME. As Sobel et al.  pointed out, ”JME is not a static concept” (P.1483). We believe the ”preparative” and ”administrative” mediation practices parents perform, like setting up media and monitoring children's media activity, should also be included in parent-child JME because parents are involved, even though in implicit ways. We pose the question for the research communities within HCI and CSCW that are interested in people's co-interactions with technologies: is there a need to expand the meaning of JME to provide a more comprehensive picture of different aspects of people's media co-engagement?
We propose that JME can be expanded to include all aspects of involvement in shared media engagement, such as supporting and administering one's media use as well as new involvement patterns to be discovered in the future, see Figure 2(b). This expanded JME can help relevant researchers better frame various involvement rather than simply focusing on ”co-using/viewing.” With the new JME, there is no need to draw on other frameworks to examine the kind of involvement that is invisible in the traditional JME. Note that our proposal simply represents the authors’ position regarding JME and does not mean other researchers should follow our position. Also, we are not arguing any of the RAC framework, JME, the expanded JME, and our proposed mediation framework is superior to one another. Instead, each framework has its own strengths and weaknesses, researchers should pick the one that works best in their own research context. However, we do hope to ignite more discussions around the relationship between parental mediation theory and JME, if we should and how to expand JME, as well as call for more research to continue improving theories framing parent-child interaction with media and technology.
Resnick and Silverman  presented 7 design principles for JME, such as multiple planes of engagement and differentiation of roles. These guidelines are highly recommended for consideration when designing creation-oriented media for children. Building upon our findings, we identified some new design implications.
First, we suggest including space and resources for supporting both parents as co-creators and children's independent play. Our findings show that parents would sometimes join their children's project as a collaborator but they also expect their children to be able to play independently and drive the creating process. Therefore, the design of a creation-oriented media should provide scenarios and tasks that can be finished by a single player and also allow space for extra players, like competing with each other on the same task, coming up with new tasks for each other, or remixing each other's work. Second, we suggest giving more priority to physicality in design. Our examination of the relationship between parental mediation patterns and the three different types of coding kits show that physical and hybrid kits can invite more participation from parents because the physical parts like robots can be easily noticed by other people in the house and elicit more interactions than a screen-based kit. Thus, to encourage more parental involvement like scaffolding and teaching, the design of coding kits and other creation-oriented media should consider including physical components. Third, we suggest that future educational media design should consider approaches that better support parents as audiences, like commenting on children's projects and providing encouragement. As the mediation pattern ”providing encouragement” shows, children often grab their parents to showcase what they have done. However, parents might not always be available when the kids want to share. As such, a design can empower children to share their projects remotely (e.g., through mobile devices) with their parents and invite parents to comment on the projects. Finally, since parents often mediate to guide their children to do meaningful activities and help solve problems children encounter, it is valuable to include features that support parents to better scaffold their children's learning with the media, e.g., activity prompts that are associated with different learning goals and instructions to address potential challenges that might arise during children's creating process .
We examine parental involvement in young children's use of a creation-oriented educational media, i.e., coding kits, from a mediation perspective in this paper. We frame parental mediation practices along three dimensions: (1) creative mediation, where parents mediate to support children's creating and learning with media, such as providing scaffolding and respecting children's project ideas; (2) preparative mediation, where parents explore and prepare media for children's engagement, such as learning how to use the media and searching for new media; and (3) administrative mediation, where parents administer and regulate their children's media usage, such as monitoring children's media activity and controlling media access. Even though different mediation practices are identified, parents mostly mediate to help their children learn and create with coding kits. We further argue to expand the meaning of Joint Media Engagement to include different parental involvement and reflect on designing for parent engagement in children's creation-oriented media, e.g., better-supporting parents as co-creators and audiences and giving priority to physicality in design. Ultimately, we hope the proposed creative, preparative, and administrative framework can provide designers of educational media for young children with a better view of parent mediation and inform media design that supports important parent involvement.
